[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Though no longer
supported by science,
the public still believes that
genes control the character
and fate, for it was perceived
that genes turning on and off
would control cell behavior.
What does it mean to
have epigenetic control
over your genes?
I'm your host, Bruce Lipton, for
this series on inner evolution.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The notion of
genetic determinism
is a belief that human
behavior is controlled
by an individual's genes.
Genetic traits are inherited.
And with the belief that genes
turn themselves on and off,
the public has been led
to believe that they
are victims of their heredity.
By 1990, the belief
in genetic control
was undermined by the new
science of epigenetic control.
The prefix "epi" means above.
Consequently, epigenetic
control translates
as control above the genes.
Specifically, the above
represents the environment
and more importantly our
perception of the environment.
Since we are able to
control our environment
and our perceptions,
this knowledge
reveals we are actually
masters at controlling our gene
activity.
Let's get deeper into the
facts about epigenetics.
In 1953, Watson and Crick
revealed to the world
the nature of the
DNA double helix.
And based on that understanding
about genes controlling life,
Francis Crick went
further and created what
is called the central dogma.
This is a conventional
belief of science
that genes control our
biology, that information
flows in a uni-directional
manner from the DNA genes
to RNA, which are the
Xerox copies of the genes,
to protein, which are the
molecules created by the gene
blueprints.
This flow path does not allow
for the cell, or the protein
mechanism, the body, to
alter its own genetic fate,
and so basically we are left
with an understanding called
the primacy of DNA.
In 1892, August Weismann,
a German scientist,
proposed the germ plasm theory.
This theory does not
allow the life experiences
of the body's cells to alter
the genetics of the germ
cells, the sperm and the eggs.
The germ cells are
set aside very early
in human development.
Even before the child is born,
the egg cells of the woman
are already predetermined
to be egg cells,
so there is a separation of
body from future germ cells.
And significance
is, then, whatever
happens in our body
presumably does not
affect the heritable traits
carried by the germ cells.
In 1967, my study
on clone stem cells
revealed a very
interesting insight
onto the nature of how
genes are controlled.
When signals from
the growth medium
touch the surface
of the cell, they're
picked up by the
receptors of the cell.
And then, those signals
from the environment
are transmitted into the
cell, via the second part
of the switch, which
are channel proteins.
So information from
the environment
is relayed across a cell
membrane, enters into the cell,
and then the signals
that enter into the cell
are actually complementing
the proteins in the cell.
And remember, when a
signal binds to a protein,
it causes the protein
to change shape.
It's the changing of the
shape of the proteins
that manifest the
characteristics of the cell's
behavior.
The study of signals going from
the environment across a cell
membrane is part of the science
called signal transduction.
When signals go into the cell,
they can go into the nucleus.
And what's in the nucleus?
The chromosomes.
Now, we must recognize
the simple fact
that chromosomes are made out
of 50% DNA and 50% protein.
Well, the signals
from the environment
can either affect
the DNA molecules
or they can affect the
protein molecules that
are forming the chromosome.
So when a signal comes
in that affects the DNA,
it affects it by
actually binding
to the surface of
the DNA molecule,
groups called
methyl groups, which
represent a carbon and
three hydrogen atoms.
A methyl group, when
attached to a DNA molecule,
can generally inhibit the
activity of that DNA blueprint,
so DNA blueprint
activity is now being
controlled by the signals
coming from the environment.
And the significance
of this is that, why
should we inhibit
the activity of genes
using environmental signals?
And the answer is
really important
because it represents this.
In the genome, we have
two copies of every gene--
one received from the mother and
one received from the father.
Outside of the function
of the immune system,
almost all other
activities of the cell
are predicated on the activity
of only one of the genes.
However, during the
developmental process,
epigenetic mechanisms will
silence one of the genes
so either the mother or
the father's character
is going to be expressed
in that individual.
To give you an analogy of
what a chromosome is like,
I'll use my arm.
My arm is a chromosome.
My sleeve is a protein
cover over the DNA.
So the DNA forms the
core of a chromosome,
and a protein sleeve
covers up that DNA.
And so in epigenetic
mechanisms, I
can affect either
the core DNA or I
can influence the
proteins that comprise
the sleeve of the chromosome.
Now, let's talk about what
happens when epigenetics
directly affects the DNA.
So in my animation, what
we see as a chromosome
with a core of DNA.
And the outer sheath of
proteins contain what
are called regulatory proteins.
These proteins, as
the name implies,
regulates the activity
of reading the genes.
When signals from
the environment
pass through the cytoplasm
and enter into the nucleus,
they can either
affect the DNA core,
or the signal from
the environment
can alter the
proteins comprising
the sheath or the sleeve
of the chromosome.
Relevance?
As illustrated in this
picture, when the signal binds
to a chromosomal protein, it
causes that chromosomal protein
to change shape.
And when that shape
change occurs,
it causes the sleeve of the
chromosome, the protein sleeve,
to come off, and this exposes
the DNA blueprint underneath.
So there's a core of DNA
and a sleeve a protein.
To give you a simple
example is this.
Here's my chromosome.
Underneath are my genes.
If I would take a magic marker
and write the genetic code
for blue eyes, so you could
read the genetic code,
I say, what does it look like
when it's in the nucleus?
I say, oh, it looks like this.
I say, can you read
the gene for blue eyes?
And the answer is no.
But to read that gene for
blue eyes, what must you do?
You must cause the
sleeve to come off.
And so when a signal binds
to a regulatory protein,
it causes the
sleeve to be removed
exposing the DNA blueprint,
the gene, for blue eyes.
This is the mechanism of
how a gene is regulated,
and it's illustrated in
this animation, where
the environmental signal
binds to a regulatory protein,
the sleeve pops off
and exposes the DNA.
Now, the interesting
part is this.
Now that the DNA is exposed,
what is the next action?
Well, remember
the central dogma?
DNA goes to RNA, and
that goes to protein.
Well, once the DNA is exposed,
the original blueprint,
a protein called an RNA
polymerase binds to the exposed
DNA, the gene, and as it moves
down the length of the gene,
it makes a copy of that gene,
but not DNA, an RNA version.
Now that I have a copy
of the gene, the RNA,
that's what goes out into
the cell, into the cytoplasm,
and the RNA copy
is actually used
to create the protein, which is
made by reading that RNA copy.
So then what happens?
OK, now let's review.
The signal comes in, binds
to a regulatory protein,
causes the sleeve to pop
off, exposes the DNA.
Now, an enzyme, RNA polymerase,
comes up, copies the gene.
The RNA goes out into the
cytoplasm where it is then
used to synthesize the protein.
And what about the gene?
Well, the sleeve
covers it back up again
when the signal is gone,
and now the gene is hidden.
What's the point?
And the point is simply this.
For 50 years, we've
talked about DNA
controlling its own
activity, but the DNA
had no control at all.
The control came
from the proteins.
When the protein sleeve was
on, can't read the gene.
When a signal causes
a protein to come off,
it exposes the gene.
Then what does the gene do?
Well, nothing.
The gene is just a blueprint.
It's the enzyme,
the RNA polymerase,
that makes a copy
of the blueprint,
and that copy, called RNA,
goes out into the cell
so I can manufacture the
protein by that gene.
Once the RNA copy is created,
we don't need the gene anymore.
The signal pops off
the protein sleeve,
the sleeve covers
up the gene, and now
it's quiescent,
not doing anything.
We can now look at
a strand of DNA,
and what we'll see
in that strand of DNA
is very simply this.
It's epigenetics, the
mechanism of epigenetics,
that is actually
controlling gene behavior.
The genes have nothing
to do with this at all,
they're just
templates to be read.
So epigenetics represents the
environmental signal coming in.
The environmental signal
can alter the DNA blueprint.
The environmental
signal can come in
and engage with a
protein and then regulate
the activity of the gene
that is now exposed.
So epigenetics has two
different actions--
on the DNA directly
or on the proteins.
One of the important aspects
of how epigenetics controls
the readout of the genes
deals with the ability
to affect the proteins that
are controlling gene activity.
Now, to illustrate
that, I'm going
to show you a picture
here of a television set
with a test pattern on it.
In the old days, the
station sent a test pattern
that could be viewed
on your television set.
So a test pattern is a pattern.
So let's make it
analogous to a gene.
But what's really
important about this is you
can adjust the dials on the
television set which will
influence that test pattern.
On and off, first of all.
Is the pattern on or
is the pattern off?
I can change the volume.
How much of this do I want?
How little of it do I want?
I can change some
other dials and change
the focus, the contrast,
the color balance.
I can change the
width and the height.
I can keep altering
the test pattern.
The test pattern is
the original gene.
And by changing the dials
on the television set,
am I actually changing the
actual test pattern itself
or am I changing the
readout of the test pattern?
Epigenetics does not
alter the gene itself.
Epigenetics actually alters
the readout of the gene.
So I can change the
readout, but I've never
changed the original gene.
As a result, I can create
over 3,000 different proteins
from the very same
gene blueprint
without altering the gene.
This is an important point
that I must emphasize.
Epigenetics does not
change the gene proper.
Epigenetics only changes
the readout of the gene.
To illustrate that, I want
to show you a stretch of DNA.
The loop in my
stretch right here
actually represents
a gene, let's say
the gene for blue eyes.
The genes only constitute
about 3% of the total DNA.
That means 97% of the DNA in
your nucleus, in your genome,
does not code for any protein.
It was referred to
incorrectly as junk DNA,
for it was once believed
that this extra 97% of DNA
was just DNA carried from
generation for generation
for a million
years, and our cells
end up with a lot of pieces of
DNA that are no longer used,
hence junk DNA.
Well, this is completely
a misunderstanding
of the whole importance of
this extra non-gene DNA.
Significance is this.
Along the stretches of that DNA
that is not coding as a gene,
there are protein modules,
groups of proteins,
that are scattered along
the DNA in front of the gene
as well as some modules
behind the gene.
The modules of protein
scattered on the DNA
are the equivalent of the
dials on the television set.
By adjusting the
modules, you can
adjust which genes are going to
turn on, how much of that gene
you're going to use,
and you can adjust
the character of the gene.
So by turning the
so-called dials
on these protein
modules, what you do
is affect the
readout of the gene.
And through this
process, you can actually
cause over 3,000 different
versions of the blueprint
to be read from a single
gene, and not altering a gene,
just altering the
readout of this gene.
The important point here is,
how can a single gene blueprint
provide for over 3,000
different proteins?
Well, the answer is
connected to something called
epigenetic gene splicing.
Remember, when the DNA molecule
is exposed in the chromosome,
we make a copy of
that DNA molecule.
It's called messenger RNA.
That messenger RNA
molecule goes out
into the cytoplasm
where a mechanism will
read that messenger and
then turn it into a protein.
Well, here's a very important
part about the messenger RNA.
It contains a series
of information
that is the building
blocks to make a protein.
So analogy that would
be very important
is, consider writing
a piece of text
on a linear piece of paper.
I start with a copy of what
we'll call the "reading" gene.
And the messenger RNA is a strip
with the word "reading" written
across the strip.
I say, and what
does epigenetics do?
It's like a pair of
scissors and tape.
You can cut that
message into pieces
and reassemble it using tape
in a different sequence.
So for example, I
can cut off the "ing"
and I end up with "read" gene.
Or I could get rid of
the R-E-A, and I'll
be left with the "ding" gene.
Or I could cut the
beginning and the end
off and be left with what
is called the "ad" gene.
Or I could cut the middle
out and join the two ends
and make the "ring" gene.
You're looking at five different
readings of the same gene
by just cutting up
the messenger RNA.
Well, when you understand
messenger RNA may
have thousands of letters, then
all of a sudden you can say,
my goodness, then I could
cut that messenger RNA up
into thousands of parts
and put them together,
and this is how I can create
over 3,000 different proteins
from the very same gene.
You are not restricted to
exactly what the gene says.
You can alter the
readout of the gene.
And I say, and what alters
the readout of the gene?
Epigenetics.
Environmental signals,
picked up by the individual,
sent through the
cells into the nucleus
where it changes the
so-called modules or dials
on that DNA to alter the final
readout of a gene blueprint.
And therefore, we
are not restricted
to whatever a gene message
is that you inherited
because you can alter any gene.
Unfortunately, here's a problem.
Most of us came with a
completely healthy, normal set
of genes for a good life.
When we alter these
genes by epigenetics,
the greater probability
is we'll actually
create a dysfunctional
protein rather than improving
the ones we inherited.
Yet, on the other hand,
think about it this way.
You could come
with a mutant gene,
and through epigenetic
alterations of the readout,
turn it into a very
healthy, active gene.
And all of a sudden,
we have to understand
the most important part.
You are not your genes.
You can change the
readout of the genes.
How do you change it?
By responding to
the environment.
And as we'll talk about
later, more importantly,
how your perception can alter
the environmental signals
and in turn alter
your genetic readout.
So simply, the concept
of genetic determinism,
you are your genes, is
a false understanding
and unfortunately
misleads people
to believe that perhaps they've
inherited a defective gene.
And now, in their
consciousness, they
can anticipate that, oh,
I'm going to get cancer
or I'm going to get
cardiovascular disease
because that's
running in my family.
Now, an example of
where a mutant gene
could be read as a normal gene
is in this picture of two mice.
The mouse on the
left is obviously
different than the
normal-looking mouse
on the right.
The mouse on the left
is expressing what
is called an agouti mutation.
An agouti mutant, obviously
one thing you could see,
is very obese compared
to a normal mouse.
It also has different
colored fur.
It also has diabetes and
cardiovascular disease.
The agouti mutant
is a mouse that
has a very short lifespan
because of the mutant agouti
gene that it carries.
Now, the mouse on
the right is the one
that looks like a
normal mouse, but here's
the interesting sidelight,
and that is this.
This mouse also carries
the mutant agouti gene,
but it looks normal.
I say, well, how can that be?
And the answer is
very interesting
because, during the development
of this mouse while it
was in utero, the mother, at a
very specific window in time,
was given a diet that included
some elements such as vitamin
B12, choline, folic
acid, and these elements
affect the epigenetic readout.
So when giving the
mother this as part
of her diet during a certain
part of the development
of the mouse, these
elements in her diet
went across the
placenta and altered
the readout of the genes
in the developing fetus.
And what it did, it had
covered up the mutant gene
for the agouti mutation.
Relevance?
This mouse has a normal
life, completely healthy.
But the important point is this.
It still has the
mutant agouti gene,
so if it mates
with another mouse,
it will pass that intact mutant
gene onto the next generation.
So the significance is, even
though the mouse is endowed
with the mutant gene,
through epigenetic mechanism,
it has covered up
that particular gene
and not expressing it.
Well, a similar
understanding can come
from studying identical twins.
The moment identical twins
are born, recognize this.
Both twins came from a single
egg cell that split into two.
Relevance?
Both twins have
exactly the same genes.
So at the moment of birth, if
you do a genetic assessment
of both twins, the
genes in either sibling
is exactly the same
as in the other one.
But then, if you come back a
year later, five years later,
10 years later, and read the
genetic readout from each
of the siblings, guess what?
They diverge over time.
And so all of a sudden,
what were identical twins
are no longer identical in
their experience and expression
of their life.
So in one sense,
one of the twins
can end up dying of
cancer and the other one
have a healthy, normal
life, and yet, they
were genetically identical.
Then all of a sudden, where
did the cancer come from?
It wasn't built into the genes.
The cancer was a consequence
of epigenetic alterations
of the genetic profile
of that individual.
So two identical twins
start out exactly the same.
But by experiencing life, and
each individually experiencing
their own expression of life,
alters their genetic readout,
they're no longer expressing
an identical characteristic.
Insight into the effect of
environment on your genes
is revealed in a very
interesting study
by Dean Ornish, an internist
in San Francisco, California.
What Dean was working with
was a group of prostate cancer
patients, and he did this
very simple experiment
with very profound results.
He separated his prostate
cancer patients into two groups.
One group was given the
conventional treatment
that prostate
cancer patients get,
including chemotherapy and
drugs to hold back the prostate
cancer.
The second group received
no medical treatment at all.
What they actually received
were lifestyle changes--
how to eat a healthier diet,
how to meditate and eliminate
stress.
And I say, well,
what's relevant?
And here's what's relevant.
They read the genetic profile of
patients in each of the groups
before the experiment.
The experiment lasted 90 days.
After 90 days, they read the
gene profile from the patients
in each group, and
what did they find out?
In the experimental group that
received no medical treatment
at all, only lifestyle
changes, over 500 genes
change their function just
by changing lifestyle.
And most of these genes were
associated with a developing
prostate cancer.
And all of a sudden,
what does this mean?
We don't have to kill
the cancer cells.
They're just the symptom of
a life that's not in harmony.
What they did is create
a better lifestyle
for these individuals.
And once they started
to become healthier
using this much more
effective lifestyle,
it also changed their
genetic readout.
Epigenetics, again, is
involved with changing
the genetic readout, and
it's involved with cancer
for a very simple reason.
There is no gene
that causes cancer.
When a person is not living
in harmony in their world,
when they're under stress
or they're living out
of balance with nature,
that's the initiating step
that will activate what
is called an oncogene,
a cancer gene.
The cancer gene did
not activate itself,
it was activated in
response to the environment.
Total importance of
this understanding
is, how did the
environment alter
the expression of the genes?
Epigenetics environmental
signals crossed into the cells
and altered the
readout of these genes.
Another understanding which
is fairly important as well
is, how long does it take
for epigenetic mechanisms
to take effect?
Days, weeks, months?
Well, an interesting study
was done with meditators.
What they did is they
read two genes that
were associated
with inflammation,
and then the meditators
went under eight hours
of meditation practice.
After eight hours, they read
the genes, and guess what?
The gene activity changed in
just eight hours of meditation.
So we once were led to
believe that our genes are
like concrete.
Whatever your genes are,
that's the story of your life.
Now we can find that, in
as little as eight hours,
you can change gene activity
by changing lifestyle,
or in this case, changing
the consciousness
through meditation.
But now we put this
all back together again
with an important
understanding, and that
is, the protein sleeve
on the chromosome
is what is controlling
the activity of the gene.
So instead of DNA, RNA, and
protein, now, above the DNA
we must put regulatory proteins
because regulatory proteins
determine which DNA is going
to be read, turned into RNA,
and then turned into protein.
Yet, that's still not the
entire chain of control.
Because guess what?
What controls
regulatory proteins?
Environmental signals.
Now, the flow of information
starts with the primary cause,
as the environment.
The environmental signals
activate epigenetic control
through the regulatory proteins.
The epigenetic control selects
which DNA is going to be read.
The epigenetic controls also
determine the blueprint copy
of that DNA because
it can alter the RNA.
That's where the
variations come from.
And then the RNA is used
to make the protein.
No longer is it the primacy
of DNA in our understanding.
It's actually now the
primacy of the environment.
Because it's the environment,
through epigenetics,
that will ultimately
determine which genes are read
and how they will be read.
And then, all of a sudden,
the conclusion is clear.
You control your
gene activity by how
you respond to the environment.
Knowledge is power.
And by definition,
a lack of knowledge
represents a lack of power.
The misinformation generated
by the outdated theory
of genetic determinism
has systematically
disempowered people
by inferring that they
are victims of their heredity.
The new insights
offered by epigenetics
empowers individuals
because it reveals
that we can regulate our
own genome by changing
our environment or changing our
perceptions of the environment.
The next episode will focus on
the mind's role in programming
the character of our genome
and our life experiences.
Thank you for joining me.
I am your host, Bruce
Lipton, for this series
on inner evolution
through biological change.
[MUSIC PLAYING]